readme.md, before:

Native PostgreSQL driver for Zig

The driver is early in development and you should consider using libpq, either directly or with a wrapper. If you do decide to use this driver, please read this readme in full to understand various caveats.

## Example
```zig
var pool = try pg.Pool.init(allocator, .{
  .size = 5,
  .connect = .{
    .port = 5432,
    .host = "127.0.0.1",
  },
  .auth = .{
    .username = "postgres",
    .database = "postgres",
    .password = "root_pw",
    .timeout = 10_000,
  }
});
defer pool.deinit();

var conn = try pool.acquire();
defer conn.release();

const sql = "select id, name from users where power > $1";
var result = conn.query(sql, .{9000}) catch |err| switch (err) {
  error.PG => {
    std.debug.print("PG: {s}", {conn.err.?.message});
    return err;
  },
  else => return err,
}
defer result.deinit();

while (try result.next()) |row| {
  const id = row.get(i32, 0);
  // this is only valid until the next call to next(), deinit() or drain()
  const name = row.get([]u8, 1);
}
```

## Conn

### open(allocator: std.mem.Allocator, opts: Conn.ConnectOpts) !Conn
Opens a connection, or returns an error. Prefer creating connections through the pool. Connection options are:

* `host`: Defaults to `"127.0.0.1"`
* `port`: Defaults to `5432`
* `write_buffer` - Size of the write buffer, used when sending messages to the server. Will temporarily allocate more space as needed. If you're writing large SQL or have large parameters (e.g. long text values), making this larger might improve performance a little. Defaults to `2048`.
* `read_buffer` - Size of the read buffer, used when reading data from the server. Will temporarily allocate more space as needed. Given most apps are going to be reading rows of data, this can have large impact on performance. Detauls to `4096`.
* `result_state_size`: Each `Result` (retrieved via a call to `query`) carries metadata about the data (e.g. the type of each column). For results with less than or equal to `result_state_size` columns, a static `state` container is used. Queries with more columns require a dynamic allocation. The Default to `32`. 

### deinit(conn: \*Conn) void
Closes the connection and releases its resources. This method should not be used when the connection comes from the pool.

### release(conn: \*Conn) void
Releases the connection back to the pool. The pool might decide to close the connection and open a new one.

### exec(sql: []const u8, args: anytype) !?usize
Executes the query with arguments, returns the number of rows affected, or null. Should not be used with a query that returns rows.

### query(sql: []const u8, args: anytype) !Result
Executes the query with arguments, returns a result.

### queryOpts(sql: []const u8, args: anytype, opts: Conn.QueryOpts) !Result
Same as `query` but takes options:

- `timeout` - This is not reliable and should probably not be used. Currently it simply puts a recv socket timeout. On timeout, the connection will likely no longer be valid (which the pool will detect and handle when the connection is released) and the underlying query will likely still execute. Defaults to `null`
- `column_names` - Whether or not the `result.column_names` should be populated. When true, this requires memory allocation (duping the column names). Default to `false`
- `allocator` - The allocator to use for any allocations needed when executing the query and reading the results. When `null` this will default to the connection's allocator. If you were executing a query in a web-request and each web-request had its own arena tied to the lifetime of the request, it might make sense to use that arena. Defaults to `null`.

## Result
The `conn.query` and `conn.queryOpts` methods return a `pg.Result` which is used to read rows and values.

### Fields
* `number_of_columns: usize` - Number of columns in the result
* `column_names: [][]const u8` - Names of the column, empty unless the query was executed withteh `column_names = true` option.

### deinit(result: \*Result) void
Releases resources associated with the result.

### drain(result: \*Result) !void
If you do not iterate through the result until `next` returns `null`, you must call `drain`. 

Why can't `deinit` handle this? If `deinit` also drained, you'd have to handle a possible error in `deinit` and you can't `try` in a defer. Thus, this is done to provide better ergonomics for the normal case - the normal case being where `next` is called until it returns `null`. In these cases, just `defer result.deinit()`.

### next(result: \*Result) !?Row
Iterates to the next row of the result, or returns null if there are no more rows.

## Row
The `row` represents a single row from a result. Any non-primitive value that you get from the `row` are valid only until the next call to the resul'ts `next`, `deinit` or `drain` methods.

### Fields
Only advance usage will need access to the row fields:

* `oids: []i32` - The PG OID value for each column in the row. See `result.number_of_columns` for the length of this slice. Might be useful if you're trying to read a non-natively supported type.
* values: []Value - The underlying byte value for each column in the row.  See `result.number_of_columns` for the length of this slice. Might be useful if you're trying to read a non-natively supported type. Has two fields, `is_null: bool` and `data: []const u8`.

### get(comptime T: type, col: usize) T
Gets a single value from the row at the specified column index (0-based). **Type mapping is strict.** For example, you **cannot** use `i32` to read an `smallint` column.

For any supported type, you can use an optional instead. Therefore, if you use `row.get(i16, 0)` the return type is `i16`. If you use `row.get(?i16, 0)` the return type is `?i16`. If you use a non-optional type for a null value, you'll get a failed assertion in `Debug` and `ReleaseSafe`, and undefined behavior in `ReleaseFast`, `ReleaseSmall` or if you set `pg_assert = false`.

* `u8` - `char`
* `i16` - `smallint`
* `i32` - `int`
* `i64` - Depends on the underlying column type. A `timestamp` will be converted to microseconds since unix epoch. Otherwise, a `bigint`.
* `f32` - `float4`
* `f64` - Depends on the underlying column type. A `numeric` will be converted to an `f64`. Otherwise, a `float`.
* `bool` - `bool`
* `[]const u8` - Returns the raw underlying data. Can be used for any column type to get the PG-encoded value. For `text` and `bytea` columns, this will be the expected value. For `numeric`, this will be a text representation of the number. For `UUID` this will be a 16-byte slice (use `pg.uuidToHex [36]u8` if you want a hex-encoded UUID). For `JSON` and `JSONB` this will be the serialized JSON value.
* `[]u8` - Alias to `[]const u8`. When using `[]u8` the return type is a `[]const u8`. This just exists to save a few keystrokes.

### iterator(comptime T: type, col: usize) Iterator(T)
Used for reading a PostgreSQL array. Optional/null support is the same as `get`.

`u8` - `char[]`
`i16` - `smallint[]`
`i32` - `int[]`
`i64` - `bigint[]` or `timestamp[]` (see `get`)
`f32` - `float4`
`f64` - `float8` (nuremic[] is currently not supported)
`bool` - `bool[]`
* `[]const u8` - More strict than `get([]u8)`). Supports: `text[]`, `char(n)[]`, `bytea[]`, `uuid[]`, `json[]` and `jsonb[]`
* `[]u8` - Alias to `[]const u8`.

## Iterator(T)
The iterator returns from `row.iterator(T, col)` can be iterated using the `next() ?T` call:

```zig
var names = row.iterator([]u8, 0);
while (names.next()) |name| {
  ...
}
```

### Fields
* `len` - the number of values in the iterator

### alloc(it: Iterator(T), allocator: std.mem.Allocator) ![]T
Allocates a slice and populates it with all values.

### fill(it: Iterator(T), into: []T) void
Fill `into` with values of the iterator. `into` can be smaller than `it.len`, in which case only `into.len` values will be filled. This can be a bit faster than calling `next()` multiple times.

## Important Notice 1 - Bind vs Read
When you read a value, such as `row.get(i32, 0)`, the library assumes you know what you're doing and that column 0 really is a non-null 32-bit integer. `row.get` doesn't return an error union. There are some assertions, but these are disabled in ReleaseFast and ReleaseSmall. You can also disable these assertions in Debug/ReleaseSafe by placing `pub const pg_assert = false;` in your root, (e.g. `main.zig`):

```zig
const std = @import("std");
...

pub const pg_assert = false;

pub fm main() !void {
  ...
}
```

Conversely, when binding a value to an SQL parameter, the library is a little more generous. For example, an `u64` will bind to an `i32` provided the value is within range.

## Important Notice 2 - Invalid Connections
Strongly consider using `pg.Pool` rather than using `pg.Conn` directly. The pool will attempt to reconnect disconnected connections or connections which are in an invalid state. Until more real world testing is done, you should assume that connections will get into invalid states.

## Important Notice 3 - Errors
Zig errorsets do not support arbitrary payloads. This is problematic in a database driver where most applications probably care about the details of an error. The library takes a simple approach. If `error.PG` is returned, `conn.err` should be set and it contains a PG error object:

```zig
_ = conn.exec("drop table x", .{}) catch |err| {
  if (err == error.PG) {
    if (conn.err) |pge| {
      std.log.err("PG {s}\n", .{pge.message});
    }
  }
  return err;
};
```

In the above snippet, it's possible to skip the `if (err == error.PG)` check, but in that case `conn.err` could be set from some previous command.

If `error.PG` is returned from a non-connection object, like a query result, the associated connection will have it's `conn.err` set. In other words, `conn.err` is the only thing you ever have to check.

## Type Support
All implementations have to deal with things like: how to support unsigned integers, given that PostgreSQL only has signed integers. Or, how to support UUIDs when the language has no UUID type. This section documents the exact behavior.

### Arrays
Numeric arrays aren't supported. Multi-dimensional arrays aren't supported. The array lower bound is always 0 (or 1 in PG)

### text, bool, bytea, char, char(n), custom enums
No surprises, arrays supported.

### smallint, int, bigint
When binding an integer, the library will coerce the Zig value to the parameter type, as long as it fits. Thus, a `u64` can be bound to a `smallint`, if the value fits, else an error will be returned.

Array binding is strict. For example, an `[]i16` must be used for a `smallint[]`parameter. The only exception is that the unsigned variant, e.g. `[]u16` can be used provided all values fit.

When reading a column, you must use the correct type. 

### Floats
When binding, `@floatCast` is used based on the SQL parameter type. Array binding is strict. When reading a value, you must use the correct type. 

### Numeric
Numeric (aka decimal) has limited support. When an `f32`, `f64` or `comptime_float` is bound to a numeric parameter, `std.fmt.formatFloatDecimal` is used to send the text-representation (which PG fully supports).

Arrays are not currently supported :(

When reading a numeric value with `[]u8` text representation will be returned. Reading with `f64` will convert this using `std.fmt.parseFloat`.

### UUID
When a `[]u8` is bound to a UUID column, it must either be a 16-byte slice, or a valid 36-byte hex-encoded UUID. Arrays behave the same.

When reading a `uuid` column with `[]u8` a 16-byte slice will be returned. Use the `pg.uuidToHex() ![36]u8` helper if you need it hex-encoded.

### Timestamp
When you bind an `i64` to a timestamp parameter, the value is assumed to be the number of microseconds since unix epoch (e.g. `std.time.microTimestamp()`). Array binding works the same.

When reading a `timestamp` column with `i64`, the number of microseconds since unix epoch will be returned

### JSON and JSONB
When binding a value to a JSON or JSONB parameter, you can either supply a serialized value (i.e. `[]u8`) or a struct which will be serialized using `std.json.stringify`.

When binding to an array of JSON or JSONB, automatic serialization is not support and thus an array of serialized values must be provided.

When reading a `JSON` or `JSONB` column with `[]u8`, the serialized JSON will be returned.

Commit message:

add row and rowOpts helpers to return a single row

readme.md, after:

Native PostgreSQL driver for Zig

The driver is early in development and you should consider using libpq, either directly or with a wrapper. If you do decide to use this driver, please read this readme in full to understand various caveats.

## Example
```zig
var pool = try pg.Pool.init(allocator, .{
  .size = 5,
  .connect = .{
    .port = 5432,
    .host = "127.0.0.1",
  },
  .auth = .{
    .username = "postgres",
    .database = "postgres",
    .password = "root_pw",
    .timeout = 10_000,
  }
});
defer pool.deinit();

var conn = try pool.acquire();
defer conn.release();

const sql = "select id, name from users where power > $1";
var result = conn.query(sql, .{9000}) catch |err| switch (err) {
  error.PG => {
    std.debug.print("PG: {s}", {conn.err.?.message});
    return err;
  },
  else => return err,
}
defer result.deinit();

while (try result.next()) |row| {
  const id = row.get(i32, 0);
  // this is only valid until the next call to next(), deinit() or drain()
  const name = row.get([]u8, 1);
}
```

## Conn

### open(allocator: std.mem.Allocator, opts: Conn.ConnectOpts) !Conn
Opens a connection, or returns an error. Prefer creating connections through the pool. Connection options are:

* `host`: Defaults to `"127.0.0.1"`
* `port`: Defaults to `5432`
* `write_buffer` - Size of the write buffer, used when sending messages to the server. Will temporarily allocate more space as needed. If you're writing large SQL or have large parameters (e.g. long text values), making this larger might improve performance a little. Defaults to `2048`.
* `read_buffer` - Size of the read buffer, used when reading data from the server. Will temporarily allocate more space as needed. Given most apps are going to be reading rows of data, this can have large impact on performance. Detauls to `4096`.
* `result_state_size`: Each `Result` (retrieved via a call to `query`) carries metadata about the data (e.g. the type of each column). For results with less than or equal to `result_state_size` columns, a static `state` container is used. Queries with more columns require a dynamic allocation. The Default to `32`. 

### deinit(conn: \*Conn) void
Closes the connection and releases its resources. This method should not be used when the connection comes from the pool.

### release(conn: \*Conn) void
Releases the connection back to the pool. The pool might decide to close the connection and open a new one.

### exec(sql: []const u8, args: anytype) !?usize
Executes the query with arguments, returns the number of rows affected, or null. Should not be used with a query that returns rows.

### query(sql: []const u8, args: anytype) !Result
Executes the query with arguments, returns a result. `deinit`, and possibly `drain`, must be called on the returned `Result`.

### queryOpts(sql: []const u8, args: anytype, opts: Conn.QueryOpts) !Result
Same as `query` but takes options:

- `timeout` - This is not reliable and should probably not be used. Currently it simply puts a recv socket timeout. On timeout, the connection will likely no longer be valid (which the pool will detect and handle when the connection is released) and the underlying query will likely still execute. Defaults to `null`
- `column_names` - Whether or not the `result.column_names` should be populated. When true, this requires memory allocation (duping the column names). Default to `false`
- `allocator` - The allocator to use for any allocations needed when executing the query and reading the results. When `null` this will default to the connection's allocator. If you were executing a query in a web-request and each web-request had its own arena tied to the lifetime of the request, it might make sense to use that arena. Defaults to `null`.

### row(sql: []const u8, args: anytype) !?QueryRow
Executes the query with arguments, returns a single row. Returns an error if the query returns more than one row. Returns null if the query returns no row. `deinit` must be called on the returned `Row`.

### row(sql: []const u8, args: anytype, opts: Conn.QueryOpts) !Result
Same as `row` but takes the same options as `queryOpts`

## Result
The `conn.query` and `conn.queryOpts` methods return a `pg.Result` which is used to read rows and values.

### Fields
* `number_of_columns: usize` - Number of columns in the result
* `column_names: [][]const u8` - Names of the column, empty unless the query was executed withteh `column_names = true` option.

### deinit(result: \*Result) void
Releases resources associated with the result.

### drain(result: \*Result) !void
If you do not iterate through the result until `next` returns `null`, you must call `drain`. 

Why can't `deinit` handle this? If `deinit` also drained, you'd have to handle a possible error in `deinit` and you can't `try` in a defer. Thus, this is done to provide better ergonomics for the normal case - the normal case being where `next` is called until it returns `null`. In these cases, just `defer result.deinit()`.

### next(result: \*Result) !?Row
Iterates to the next row of the result, or returns null if there are no more rows.

## Row
The `row` represents a single row from a result. Any non-primitive value that you get from the `row` are valid only until the next call to the resul'ts `next`, `deinit` or `drain` methods.

### Fields
Only advance usage will need access to the row fields:

* `oids: []i32` - The PG OID value for each column in the row. See `result.number_of_columns` for the length of this slice. Might be useful if you're trying to read a non-natively supported type.
* values: []Value - The underlying byte value for each column in the row.  See `result.number_of_columns` for the length of this slice. Might be useful if you're trying to read a non-natively supported type. Has two fields, `is_null: bool` and `data: []const u8`.

### get(comptime T: type, col: usize) T
Gets a single value from the row at the specified column index (0-based). **Type mapping is strict.** For example, you **cannot** use `i32` to read an `smallint` column.

For any supported type, you can use an optional instead. Therefore, if you use `row.get(i16, 0)` the return type is `i16`. If you use `row.get(?i16, 0)` the return type is `?i16`. If you use a non-optional type for a null value, you'll get a failed assertion in `Debug` and `ReleaseSafe`, and undefined behavior in `ReleaseFast`, `ReleaseSmall` or if you set `pg_assert = false`.

* `u8` - `char`
* `i16` - `smallint`
* `i32` - `int`
* `i64` - Depends on the underlying column type. A `timestamp` will be converted to microseconds since unix epoch. Otherwise, a `bigint`.
* `f32` - `float4`
* `f64` - Depends on the underlying column type. A `numeric` will be converted to an `f64`. Otherwise, a `float`.
* `bool` - `bool`
* `[]const u8` - Returns the raw underlying data. Can be used for any column type to get the PG-encoded value. For `text` and `bytea` columns, this will be the expected value. For `numeric`, this will be a text representation of the number. For `UUID` this will be a 16-byte slice (use `pg.uuidToHex [36]u8` if you want a hex-encoded UUID). For `JSON` and `JSONB` this will be the serialized JSON value.
* `[]u8` - Alias to `[]const u8`. When using `[]u8` the return type is a `[]const u8`. This just exists to save a few keystrokes.

### iterator(comptime T: type, col: usize) Iterator(T)
Used for reading a PostgreSQL array. Optional/null support is the same as `get`.

`u8` - `char[]`
`i16` - `smallint[]`
`i32` - `int[]`
`i64` - `bigint[]` or `timestamp[]` (see `get`)
`f32` - `float4`
`f64` - `float8` (nuremic[] is currently not supported)
`bool` - `bool[]`
* `[]const u8` - More strict than `get([]u8)`). Supports: `text[]`, `char(n)[]`, `bytea[]`, `uuid[]`, `json[]` and `jsonb[]`
* `[]u8` - Alias to `[]const u8`.

## QueryRow
A `QueryRow` is returned from a call to `conn.row` or `conn.rowOpts` and wraps both a `Result` and a `Row.` It exposes the same methods as `Row` as well as `deinit`, which must be called once the `QueryRow` is no longer needed.

## Iterator(T)
The iterator returns from `row.iterator(T, col)` can be iterated using the `next() ?T` call:

```zig
var names = row.iterator([]u8, 0);
while (names.next()) |name| {
  ...
}
```

### Fields
* `len` - the number of values in the iterator

### alloc(it: Iterator(T), allocator: std.mem.Allocator) ![]T
Allocates a slice and populates it with all values.

### fill(it: Iterator(T), into: []T) void
Fill `into` with values of the iterator. `into` can be smaller than `it.len`, in which case only `into.len` values will be filled. This can be a bit faster than calling `next()` multiple times.

## Important Notice 1 - Bind vs Read
When you read a value, such as `row.get(i32, 0)`, the library assumes you know what you're doing and that column 0 really is a non-null 32-bit integer. `row.get` doesn't return an error union. There are some assertions, but these are disabled in ReleaseFast and ReleaseSmall. You can also disable these assertions in Debug/ReleaseSafe by placing `pub const pg_assert = false;` in your root, (e.g. `main.zig`):

```zig
const std = @import("std");
...

pub const pg_assert = false;

pub fm main() !void {
  ...
}
```

Conversely, when binding a value to an SQL parameter, the library is a little more generous. For example, an `u64` will bind to an `i32` provided the value is within range.

## Important Notice 2 - Invalid Connections
Strongly consider using `pg.Pool` rather than using `pg.Conn` directly. The pool will attempt to reconnect disconnected connections or connections which are in an invalid state. Until more real world testing is done, you should assume that connections will get into invalid states.

## Important Notice 3 - Errors
Zig errorsets do not support arbitrary payloads. This is problematic in a database driver where most applications probably care about the details of an error. The library takes a simple approach. If `error.PG` is returned, `conn.err` should be set and it contains a PG error object:

```zig
_ = conn.exec("drop table x", .{}) catch |err| {
  if (err == error.PG) {
    if (conn.err) |pge| {
      std.log.err("PG {s}\n", .{pge.message});
    }
  }
  return err;
};
```

In the above snippet, it's possible to skip the `if (err == error.PG)` check, but in that case `conn.err` could be set from some previous command.

If `error.PG` is returned from a non-connection object, like a query result, the associated connection will have it's `conn.err` set. In other words, `conn.err` is the only thing you ever have to check.

## Type Support
All implementations have to deal with things like: how to support unsigned integers, given that PostgreSQL only has signed integers. Or, how to support UUIDs when the language has no UUID type. This section documents the exact behavior.

### Arrays
Numeric arrays aren't supported. Multi-dimensional arrays aren't supported. The array lower bound is always 0 (or 1 in PG)

### text, bool, bytea, char, char(n), custom enums
No surprises, arrays supported.

### smallint, int, bigint
When binding an integer, the library will coerce the Zig value to the parameter type, as long as it fits. Thus, a `u64` can be bound to a `smallint`, if the value fits, else an error will be returned.

Array binding is strict. For example, an `[]i16` must be used for a `smallint[]`parameter. The only exception is that the unsigned variant, e.g. `[]u16` can be used provided all values fit.

When reading a column, you must use the correct type. 

### Floats
When binding, `@floatCast` is used based on the SQL parameter type. Array binding is strict. When reading a value, you must use the correct type. 

### Numeric
Numeric (aka decimal) has limited support. When an `f32`, `f64` or `comptime_float` is bound to a numeric parameter, `std.fmt.formatFloatDecimal` is used to send the text-representation (which PG fully supports).

Arrays are not currently supported :(

When reading a numeric value with `[]u8` text representation will be returned. Reading with `f64` will convert this using `std.fmt.parseFloat`.

### UUID
When a `[]u8` is bound to a UUID column, it must either be a 16-byte slice, or a valid 36-byte hex-encoded UUID. Arrays behave the same.

When reading a `uuid` column with `[]u8` a 16-byte slice will be returned. Use the `pg.uuidToHex() ![36]u8` helper if you need it hex-encoded.

### Timestamp
When you bind an `i64` to a timestamp parameter, the value is assumed to be the number of microseconds since unix epoch (e.g. `std.time.microTimestamp()`). Array binding works the same.

When reading a `timestamp` column with `i64`, the number of microseconds since unix epoch will be returned

### JSON and JSONB
When binding a value to a JSON or JSONB parameter, you can either supply a serialized value (i.e. `[]u8`) or a struct which will be serialized using `std.json.stringify`.

When binding to an array of JSON or JSONB, automatic serialization is not support and thus an array of serialized values must be provided.

When reading a `JSON` or `JSONB` column with `[]u8`, the serialized JSON will be returned.
